# Harvard Systems-Theory Seminar

## Description
We are hoping to spur more fruitful collaborations between the theorists and the systems folks through Systems-Theory seminar. The seminar will be in Harvard SEC 2.330, with talks starting at 3:45 and snacks at 3:00.

If you'd like to join our seminar announcement mailing list, please email Gioia Sweetland at gioia@seas.harvard.edu.

## Schedule

### Spring 2023
- 01/24/2023 **Scheduling Challenges for DNN Training Workloads**
  * Speaker: [Amar Phanishayee](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/people/amar/) (Microsoft Research)
  * Abstract: In this talk, I'll highlight some scheduling challenges for DNN training workloads that we have tackled in the context of Project Fiddle.  Scheduling is a rather broad term. I am first going to show you how current DNN frameworks are culpable in excluding the masses from being able to develop, debug, or train large DNN models on modest deployments, and how changes to task scheduling within a DNN job can push the envelope for democratizing large model development.  I'll then talk about multi-tenancy and some of the cross-job scheduling opportunities that improve cluster utilization, fairness, performance, etc.  Time permitting, I'll end by describing a toolkit for developing research schedulers that we have been building using our experience of working on many cluster schedulers for DNN workloads in the past. 

- 02/07/2023 **A New Toolbox for Scheduling Theory**
  * Speaker: [Ziv Scully](https://ziv.codes/) (Cornell)
  * Abstract: Queueing delays are ubiquitous in many domains, including computer systems, service systems, communication networks, supply chains, and transportation. Queueing and scheduling theory provide a rigorous basis for understanding how to reduce delays with scheduling, including evaluating policy performance and guiding policy design. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art theory fails to address many practical concerns. For example, scheduling theory seldom treats nontrivial preemption limitations, and there is very little theory for scheduling in multiserver queues. We present two new, broadly applicable tools that greatly expand the reach of scheduling theory, using each to solve multiple open problems. The first tool, called “SOAP”, is a new unifying theory of scheduling in single-server queues, specifically the M/G/1 model. SOAP characterizes the delay distribution of a broad space of policies, most of which have never been analyzed before. Such policies include the Gittins index policy, which minimizes mean delay in low-information settings, and many policies with preemption limitations. The second tool, called “WINE”, is a new queueing identity that complements Little’s law. WINE enables a new method of analyzing complex queueing systems by relating them to simpler systems. This results in the first delay bounds for SRPT (shortest remaining processing time) and the Gittins index policy in multiserver queues, specifically the M/G/k model.

- 02/21/2023 **Networking at the Speed of Light**
  * [Brighten Godfrey](https://pbg.cs.illinois.edu/) (UIUC) (on zoom)
  * Abstract: Low latency is a requirement for a variety of interactive network applications, from web browsing to emerging applications like virtual reality. But latency is also one of the most fundamentally challenging performance objectives.  We'll explore this challenge in two domains.
First, we tackle whether it is possible to build an Internet that moves data at nearly the speed of light in vacuum. Our speed-of-light ISP (cISP) design provides ultra-low latency with an optimized topology using free-space microwave links, accounting for practical factors ranging from transmission tower availability to reliability in inclement weather.  cISP achieves mean latencies within 5% of what's possible using great-circle paths at the speed of light.
Next, we move to the wireless edge, where 5G has high bandwidth but little latency improvement for common applications.  We address the difficult bandwidth-latency tradeoff with DChannel, a system that utilizes two channels – one high bandwidth, one low latency – simultaneously, making them appear like one channel to the application. DChannel steers packets intelligently so that even when the low-latency channel offers <1% of the bandwidth of eMBB, using both channels can improve page load time and mobile apps by 16-40%. We'll close with an open theoretical question of how to design optimal packet steering algorithms.

- 03/07/2023 **Building smarter networks using in-network computing** 
  *  [Xiaoqi Chen](https://www.cs.princeton.edu/~xiaoqic/) (Princeton) (in person)
  * Abstract: The emergence of programmable switches allows network operators to run customized algorithms directly in the network data plane to process individual packets, providing us a prime opportunity to improve network performance and security. However, to meet tight bandwidth and latency requirements, switches impose strict memory and computational constraints on these algorithms. In my research, I adopt approximation techniques to design efficient data-plane algorithms for more granular network measurement and real-time, closed-loop control. I then deploy these algorithms in real-world campus and carrier networks to improve the quality of experience of Internet users.
In this talk, I will first introduce BeauCoup, a framework for simultaneously executing many traffic queries on programmable switches. BeauCoup utilizes coupon collectors to approximately answer each count-distinct query using less than one memory access per packet on average. This allows it to support a large number of queries without exceeding the memory access constraints of the switch hardware. Second, I will present ConQuest, a data-plane algorithm that analyzes and mitigates “microbursts” -- sub-millisecond traffic bursts that fill up the switch queuing buffer and cause delay and packet loss. ConQuest uses a novel data structure to approximately identify the bursty flows that occupy a large fraction of the queuing buffer. This allows ConQuest to deprioritize or drop such flows in real time, to protect other user traffic from suffering higher delay or packet loss.

- 03/21/2023 **From Error-Estimating Codes to Approximate Nearest Neighbors Search (ANNS):  A Networking Researcher’s Unusual Journey into Database Research**
  *  [Jim Xu](https://www.cc.gatech.edu/home/jx/) (Georgia Tech) (in person)
  * Abstract: Approximate Nearest Neighbors Search (ANNS), aka similarity search, has been an important research topic for decades, with new and challenging ANNS problems continue to emerge from database and machine learning applications.  ANNS problems, classical or new alike, have become increasingly difficult to solve due to the rapid growth of data (set) size and dimension in the past two decades.  This talk will summarize my research in the past three years into ANNS.  In this research, we have formulated new and exciting ANNS problems (e.g. ANNS after linear transformation, or ANNS-ALT), produced highly scalable ANNS solutions (e.g., ONe Index for All Kernels, or ONIAK), and designed fundamental algorithmic primitives that are the secret sauce that makes our ANNS solutions highly scalable.   These primitives are fundamental in that they can be used to solve other (than ANNS) database and machine learning problems.  Indeed, so far they have already led to the resolution of three high-profile algorithmic research questions that have been open or “openly hated” for decades:  (1) Can we compute an arbitrary multi-dimensional range sum of (ideally i.i.d.) RVs in polylog time and space?  (2) Can we perform multi-dimensional data cube queries and updates in polylog time and space? (3) Can we compute the quadratic form x^T Gx (given x as argument) in less than O(d^2) time, where G is a d*d Gaussian random matrix (fixed after being generated)?  Interestingly, the seed of this database research was planted a decade ago, during my pursuit of a wireless networking research problem called error-estimating codes, but embarrassingly it took me nearly a decade to connect the dots. 
  
- 04/04/2023 CANCELLED 

- 04/20/2023 Michael Schapira (in person)
